[Music]
welcome once again to Downing Street for
the daily coronavirus briefing I'm
joined by Professor John Newton our
testing coordinator and by deputy chief
scientific adviser Angela McLean this
morning at 11 o'clock we pause to
remember the 85 NHS colleagues and the
19 colleagues from Social Care who've
lost their lives with coronavirus it was
a solemn moment of reflection for so
many of us and of unbearable sadness for
some these are the nation's fallen
heroes and we will remember them every
day we're working through our plan to
protect life and to protect the NHS
slowing the spread and building capacity
so that the NHS at all times can offer
the very best care to everybody because
we've got the beds and the ventilators
and the staff available so far thanks to
the incredible work of NHS colleagues
and the shared sacrifice of everyone
who's at home that plan is working the
latest figures show 3260 spare critical
care beds across the NHS on the most
recent figures they've been 763 thousand
three hundred and eighty-seven tests for
coronavirus so far in the UK including
forty three thousand four hundred and
fifty three yesterday one hundred and
sixty one thousand one hundred and forty
five people have tested positive an
increase of three thousand nine hundred
and ninety-six fifteen thousand seven
hundred and ninety-six people are
currently in hospital with coronavirus
twenty one thousand six hundred and
seventy eight have now sadly died in
hospital an increase of five hundred and
eighty six since yesterday
this morning the Office for National
Statistics and the CQC published more
information on the overall impact
including that there have been four
thousand three hundred and forty three
notified deaths in care homes since
Easter the proportion of coronavirus
deaths in care homes is around a sixth
of the total which is just below what we
see in normal times I want to make sure
that we bring as much transparency as
possible to enforcement information like
this and so from tomorrow we'll be
publishing not just the number of deaths
in hospital each day but the number of
deaths in care homes and in the
community too this is something that
wasn't previously possible this will
supplement the ons and CQC weekly
publication and all add to our
understanding of how this virus is
spreading day by day and it will help
inform the judgments that we make as we
work to keep people safe behind every
single death is a family's heartbreak
and we must do everything humanly
possible to save as many lives as we can
we will not be changing the social
distancing rules until our five tests
have been met the NHS protected
infection rates falling the number of
deaths falling substantially the
operational challenges around testing
and PPE addressed and no risk of a
second spike I want to update you on two
other issues of major importance first
on testing at the start of the month I
set a goal of a hundred thousand tests a
day every day we're ramping up this
testing capacity on track to meet that
goal we're continuously opening new
drive-thru centers there are now 41 with
48 going live this week for people who
can't get to the tests we're expanding
home testing to bring the tests to them
we're increasing the dispatch of home
test kits from
five thousand a day last Friday 225
thousand a day by the end of the week at
the weekend 17 mobile testing units man
by the Army were operational by the end
of the week we plan to have over 70
deployed with trained crews right across
the country all of this has led to an
increase in daily testing capacity which
now stands at 73 thousand four hundred
and this has allowed us progressively to
expand access to testing we started with
hospital patients who've always had the
access to tests right the way through
ramping up to include symptomatic NHS
and social care colleagues and their
households and then to all essential
workers today because we've been able to
expand capacity I can expand access
further building on successful pilots
we'll be rolling out testing of
asymptomatic residents and staff in care
homes in England and to patients and
staff in the NHS this will mean that
anyone who is working or living in a
care home will be able to get access to
a test whether they have symptoms or not
I'm determined to do everything I can to
protect the most vulnerable and we now
have the capacity to go further still so
from now we're making testing available
to all over 65s and their households
with symptoms and to all workers who
would have to leave home in order to go
to work and members of their households
again who have symptoms so from
construction workers to emergency
plumbers from research scientists to
those in manufacturing the expansion of
access to testing will protect the most
vulnerable and help keep people safe and
it's possible because we've expanded
capacity for testing thus far
next I want to update you on our covert
19th therapeutics work this is research
to understand whether existing drugs
could be used to treat people more
effectively once they've developed the
disease currently no drugs in the world
have been clinically proven to treat
covert 19 but our therapeutics taskforce
has identified a number of promising
candidates currently six different
treatments have been entered
international clinical trials and the
first is ready to enter the next stage a
new early phase clinical trial platform
that we're launching today this is a
national effort made possible by
government academia and industry all
working together in addition we have to
make the best possible use of all the
medicines that we have we're updating
the guidelines for the use of medicines
in care homes removing a barrier so that
for the period of the pandemic where
it's clinically appropriate medicines
that have been labeled for you spot by
one patient can be used by another
patient who needs them instead of being
destroyed clinicians and colleagues in
social care have called for this change
and it's already standard procedure in
hospitals right across government we're
working day and night to defeat this
virus ramping up testing capacity
investigating new drugs and treatments
backing vaccine development securing and
distributing billions of items of PPE
getting the NHS whatever resources it
needs to make sure that it is always
there to treat everybody who needs it
the risk of a second peak is real but as
a nation we're holding it at bay so
please stay at home protect the NHS and
save lives I'm now going to turn to the
deputy chief scientific adviser to take
us through the daily charts Angela thank
you very much I could have the first
slide please I wanted to go into a bit
more detail about the five tests for
adjusting the lockdown so the first of
those is that the NHS shall have
sufficient capacity to provide critical
care
and specialist treatment right across
the UK the second is that we should have
seen a sustained and consistent fall in
daily deaths from coronavirus number
three says that we must have reliable
data to show us that the rate of
infection is decreasing to manageable
levels right across the board fourth is
that operational challenges including
testing and PPE are in hand with supply
able to meet future demand and the fifth
test is that we must be confident that
any adjustments that we make to our
current measures will not risk a second
peak of infections that might overwhelm
the NHS and if I could just have the
next slide please
here is a description of transport use
and how it has changed across Great
Britain for a number of different ways
of traveling and it starts on the 16th
of March on the left-hand side and runs
to Saturday 26th of April and what you
see when you look at these data is how
volumes of all kinds of traffic have
fallen relative to how much travel
travel there was in the first week of
February
so in particular we remain pleased to
see that the use of public transport is
below 20% for buses the tube and
national rail and we just very much hope
that all those people are in motor
vehicles who are not below 20 percent
are practicing really excellent social
distancing when they get it wherever it
is that they're going next slide please
we know that's been a lot of work for
everybody and the slide is new cases in
the UK between the 21st of March and the
28th of April and what it shows is that
that that so this is new positive tests
in dark blue as Tess
that happened in hospitals and in orange
is additional testing that has become
available for key workers and what you
see in that slide is how that number of
positive tests rose very quickly in
through the latter part of March and has
now stabilized and the blue line the
numbers in hospital positive tests is
starting to fall although because the
number of tests is still rising overall
we're still getting about the same
number of positive tests across the UK
next slide please
this instead of counting tests counts
people so this is people who are in
hospital with Kovac 19 again across the
UK and what you see is the is that
overall that has fallen by 14% in the
last I think it's in the last week sorry
I'm looking for a date yes over the last
week
that's fallen by 14% particularly
dramatic fall in London where the number
of people in hospital peaked early
compared with the rest of the country
and several other regions of England now
clearly falling although a few regions
of England that number of people in
hospital is is still stable for now
next slide please this is critical care
beds in which there is a patient with
Kovac 19 so this is two kinds of
critical care beds those in high
dependency wards and those intent in
intensive care awards and the four
different lines are England Northern
Ireland Wales and Scotland and what you
see is what percentage of those beds
that can be used for critical care are
occupied by a patient with cope of
nineteen again what you see is across
our four nations that has peaked and is
beginning to fall as a percentage next
slide please
we have to turn to how many people have
died from David and our first we're
counting that is Bailey Koba 19 deaths
in hospital so this is a slide that many
of us would be familiar with it's the
way we have been counting for more than
a month now when you look at that slide
the first thing you see is this well I
guess the first thing you see is that
the number of deaths in hospital has
started to form it's been falling for
the last two weeks you see that most
easily by looking at the orange line the
orange line is a seven day rolling
average and the reason we use that is
that there are these very strong weekend
effects in these data so what you see is
that out of every seven days there are
always two days when it's really low
followed by day when it's a much when
it's much higher because today is
Tuesday it's higher today because on a
Tuesday we report results from a few
days ago I think the most important
thing to see there is that the orange
line is falling steadily but this is
just one of the ways that we can count
how many people have died with Cova da
next slide please
this is a different way of counting the
same thing so this is all weakly
registered deaths from coded 19 across
the UK compared with what I just showed
you the deaths in hospital so let's just
look at the last bar which is for the
week leading up to the 17th of April the
dark blue bar is what we just looked at
but some but summed up up to then
whereas the pale blue bar is all weakly
registered deaths so that's everybody
not just the people who died with Cobra
in hospital if I could have the next
slide please
so what the next slide does is it takes
the the pale blue line that we just had
and breaks it out into a number of
different locations so what you see is
Hospital is the right-hand bar in the in
a sort of smoky blue
just the left of that is people who died
with covered in care homes just below
that is people who died with covered in
their own home and then the smallest bar
is other locations so what you can see
here is that deaths from kovat are
dominated by those deaths in hospital
but that is not the only location in
which such deaths are seen next slide
please
the last slide for today compares UK
deaths with those in other nations so
these lines are lined up against the
first day when there had been a total of
50 deaths accumulated in each of these
nations and we have two different lines
on there describing what's happened in
the UK towards the right hand side you
see a dark blue line labeled UK
hospitals only and that's the data that
we've been collecting and showing for a
long time so it's people who've died
with Co vyd in UK hospitals whereas a
grey line further over to the left there
is people who have died with kovat in
the UK in all settings and not
surprisingly if you count all settings
that line is higher than the people who
died in UK hospitals that's the end of
the data for today
thank you very much thanks very much
indeed as with yesterday we're now going
to take questions from the public
before turning to journalists and the
first we're going to take two questions
today from the public these are
questions that as with the questions
from journalists and we don't see in
advance and the first I'll read out from
the screen and then the second is going
to be relayed by video so the first
question is from Amanda from Hull and
she asks given that grandparents cannot
be used as childcare what is the plan
for easing the lockdown for full-time
working parents who have young children
that may not be allowed to be in school
on a full-time basis and Amanda this is
a really good question and the honest
answer I can give you is that it is
still too early to say when we're going
to be able to get schools to go back
because there are still too many deaths
each day and the five tests that we set
out haven't been met now I know
especially as a father of three young
children that there's a yearning from
people to know when schools might go
back and of course it's something that
we think about and we talk about and I'm
sorry that I can't give you a more
definitive answer but I can't because we
don't yet have the number of deaths and
the number of infections low enough for
that to be safe to reopen the schools
and we don't yet know how fast the the
number of new cases will fall and so we
haven't been able to make that decision
yet Angela I don't know if you want to
add I'm not sure I do have anything to
add on that um we are of course all of
us yearning for the number of deaths
each data for thank you Amanda thank you
for your question and all I can say is
that I hope we can be in a position to
be able to give a definitive answer as
soon as possible and the best way to get
there is for people everybody watching
to stay at home in order to protect the
NHS to save lives and to bring that
curve down Thank You Amanda and next
question hi my question is regarding my
ten year old son who has cystic fibrosis
and autism
apart from shielding is there any other
option for him and others in the
extremely vulnerable category to return
to school and be part of society again
without a vaccine available Thank You
Sadie the the answer to this is yes and
we have made sure in the school's policy
that we're working very hard to ensure
that those who have
who have extra needs for instance people
with autism and cystic fibrosis get that
extra support it is of course very very
hard though when that clashes with the
with the medical needs which have to
come first and for those who are in the
shielded category I'm afraid that the
safest thing for them to do is to is to
be shielded which is not just to stay at
home but really be protected from all
contact because of the consequences
should they get the disease I think
that's right thank you very much and
thank you for your for your question and
of course you mentioned a vaccine and
we're all working incredibly hard to try
to get a vaccine as soon as possible but
again the science behind that is
uncertain and so the timings are
uncertain and thank you very much for
those two questions from the public I
think that this is working well having
questions from members of the public I'm
very grateful to all those who've
submitted and it's something that we're
going to keep on doing and so thanks
very much and now we'll turn to hugh pim
from the BBC thank you very much I
wanted to raise the subject of PPE I
know it's been discussed several times
at this occasion before but it's still a
talking point after panorama and also a
survey of doctors suggesting some are
our concerns still what assurances can
you give from line staff that there will
be adequate supplies of PPE in the days
and weeks ahead well thank you
and the the issue of PPE is incredibly
important and making sure that there are
the supplies of PPE so that everybody on
the front line has the PPE and the
protective equipment that they need and
as you know we've been we've been moving
heaven and earth to get the amount of
PPE that we need to the frontline both
buying it from abroad and also then
distributing it that system is getting
stronger all the time but it is a
mammoth effort to do it and I I saw two
of the things that you referred to I'm
not sure that they were
a fair and objective journalistic
assessment of the situation but what we
do have is constant focus on the
realities of getting PPE to the
frontline and we take full
responsibility to getting it to every
single person who needs it yes of course
can you assure staff that stocks are not
running low at the moment well I can
assure staff that the PPE that we need
according to the agreed guidelines that
is available we constantly needing to
buy more from abroad and to make more at
home to make sure we constantly
replenishing that and and and that is a
that's a huge effort you know globally
there's a shortage of PPE because the
demand for PPE understandably in so many
countries is shot up and therefore we're
out buying it around the rest of the
world and I'm really glad that a whole
host of factories here in the UK are
turning over their production towards
towards PPE it's incredibly important
it's a huge amount of effort and we're
working on it as hard as we possibly can
thanks you Paul brand from ITV we've
lost your audio Paul Oh Polly you can
hear me now health secretary excellent
given today's statistics health
secretary do you now recognize that
while you've prevented the NHS from the
coming overwhelmed there is now a crisis
in the care sector and given that the
number of deaths continues to go up in
care homes each day will it now be your
main priority
well of course care homes have been a
top priority right from the start
we put out our first guidance to add to
the to care homes and in February and
and we've been working with them
throughout now by their nature the care
homes look after and support some of the
most vulnerable people anyway and they
support some of the people who are most
vulnerable to this disease as well
because of the nature of the disease and
how it impacts on especially on older
people much more than the rest of the
population so it's been a focus from the
start and we've strengthened the rules
around around and what happens in care
homes and try and improved infection
control and and also making testing
available right throughout the care
sector I think is incredibly important
as we've ramped up the availability of
testing and we keep a close eye on it
and I'm very glad that we're now able to
publish these daily data which will keep
the focus on what's happening in care
homes I asked for that to start and I I
think we talked about it a week or so
ago and now we've got those data being
collected so that we can we can focus on
it day in day out and you know my
principle in this is to be as
transparent as possible because then you
find problems as quickly as possible and
we can get in and address it you say
that it you'll keep an eye on it but
carers are frustrated and I understand
this is a complex sector there's lots of
private providers here it's not like the
NHS and that's a fair point that you
have often made but given that the
number of deaths in gay homes continues
to go up every day surely this has to be
your first priority now this looks as
though this is where the virus continues
to spread the the the spread of the
virus through care homes is absolutely a
top priority yes and on the testing I
think John Newton wanted to absolutely
well yes I mean it is absolutely right
that care homes are a focus and in fact
we've done some intensive studies of
infection in care homes and what that
showed was that the presence of symptoms
was not a very good marker in the care
home setting based a month residents and
staff for the presence of the virus say
there were significant numbers of
residents who were asymptomatic who had
the virus and so we've massively
increased the amount of testing
available so we've we've now tested
25,000 residents in care homes and we're
rolling out testing now to symptomatic
and asymptomatic residents as well as
providing testing through the drive-ins
through-and-through other the other
means that secular states mentioned for
staff and we think that will really make
a difference combined with intensive
infection control methods informed by
much more widely available testing
thanks John
Nick Martin from sky very good afternoon
a question for all of you but the health
secretary first I just want to clarify
something you said in your introduction
Secretary of State you said a proportion
of Korona deaths in care homes around
the sixth of the total I mean in week 16
which i think is ending April the 17th
care home deaths were actually 23% of
the official Cobra deaths and of total
deaths so not just code word closer to
1/3 are you saying that the number of
people who've died in care homes during
this crisis is around in line with the
number of deaths you would normally see
in any other year no one absolutely not
saying that that latter point what I was
saying very clearly is that in the
statistics that have been published so
far the number of deaths from
coronavirus in care homes is around a
sixth in total but of course the
breakdown of the statistics exactly as
you say shows that that has that's that
proportion is changing and we've got to
so I was I was putting it in the broad
context but also saying that it is an
absolute focus of ours because it's an
area which you've heighted highlighted
many times in the past and an area where
we've got a huge amount of focus thanks
Ben and Kentish from LBC follow-up yes
of course of course Mary I'm so sorry no
problem a lot of people have died in
care homes I've seen it with my own eyes
and you knew and your department knew
that this was a high-risk area you gave
you've issued guidance to care homes
repeatedly over the last few months and
yet P P was inadequate tests for the
most part were few and far between
but yet the deaths in care homes seem to
take you in your department by surprise
I wonder and this hasn't meant to be a
clever catchy route question at all but
I wonder if you will take this
opportunity to apologize to those
families of loved ones who died in care
homes because the government didn't
properly protect them that's the thing
is Nick I think that's I think that's
unreasonable as a question actually and
and I know you care an awful lot about
this but from the start we know we knew
that there was a very significant
challenge with care homes not least
because of the frailty of the of the
residents and and the enormous work
that's gone on within government public
health England and local authorities and
the CQC to monitor this from the start
it has been more difficult to get data
flowing and I'm very glad we're able to
do that now on a daily basis instead of
a weekly basis as before and making sure
that care homes have the support they
need has been absolutely at front of
mind right from the start in fact I can
remember in one of the very early
discussions about coronavirus in January
the having a discussion about because
one of the first things we knew about
this virus was that it had a very strong
age profile as in it was much more
dangerous for older people that that
would immediately that immediately draw
our attention to the fact that there was
a big challenge in care homes especially
because people are more frail and
therefore they're more at risk so we
it's something that we focused on right
from the start and something that's been
a huge challenge throughout and we're
constantly learning from what happens
and trying to improve the way that we we
support people across the care sector
been Kentish from lbc secretary of state
why didn't you bring in tests earlier it
just seems odd that the it took a while
for tests to come through why didn't you
if you knew the risks and as you've just
clearly said why did it take you so long
to give the sector what it was crying
for and that was tests well we have been
testing in care homes right from the
start and throughout the crisis so
that's one of the things in your
question that I dispute and I know the
passion that you have for this subject
but it is really important to base to
attend to and to express to explain
what's been going on and we've been
testing right from the start
John so it's important to understand
that from the word go public our thing
that's been investigating any outbreaks
of coronavirus in care homes and the
approach there would be to test a
limited number when test capacity was
limited we're talking about beginning of
April test capacity was limited to test
a number of index cases to clarify that
it was an outbreak of corona virus the
then the whole care home would be
treated as if the symptomatic cases were
all corona virus and and various
measures are put in place and no doubt
many lives saved as a result obviously
now we have more testing and we have
more knowledge about the way the virus
spreads in care homes we're able to
adapt that and will be even more
effective but it'd be wrong to say that
testing was not available and not used
and it'll also be wrong to say that
nothing was done about these these
outbreaks a great deal was done but we
are we're confident we can be more
effective now than in the past and the
the issue of care homes is an
international one every country in
Europe has had a has has had a
significant problem with a a large
proportion of the deaths from corona
virus occurring in a care home sector we
are we are no different in that respect
and the care home sector is a highly
distributed system it's very is
intrinsically difficult to deliver
services to that sector but nevertheless
a huge effort has been made in
collaboration with organizations like
the Care Quality Commission and also
local government so a lot has been done
we all want to do more and we are
certainly with testing we're going to
we're going to be able to do a lot more
with this additional capacity that
sector estate described thanks Nick
been Kentish from LBC thank you good
afternoon to your secretary of state I
know you've said you're following the
science on this but it's been almost a
week since your scientific advisors made
a new recommendation in relation to the
use of face masks Scotland today
becoming the latest country to recommend
they are used in public places you able
to tell us about the deliberations
you're making on that
what the delay is and when we're likely
to hear some sort of ruling some sorts
of advice on that and if I could also
ask very quickly to professor McLean
another practical question next Bert's
in some countries have given very clear
advice about stopping the spread of this
disease from surfaces I know you've
recommended washing hands but other
countries for example is saying people
should be disinfecting they're washing
takeaway boxes anything really coming
into their house are you recommending
British people do those sorts of things
to thank you well there there are all
questions to professor McLean what I'd
say is that on on face masks we do we
are guided by the science but in the
government position hasn't change and
the professor McLean will explain the
science the government position the UK
government position hasn't changed not
least because this most important thing
people can do is the social distancing
as opposed to the weak science on face
masks there's very clear science on
social distancing and the importance of
it so that is our absolute priority in
terms of our the message to the public
that the social distancing staying at
home is the thing that is helping to
save lives by flattening the curve that
is the number one thing the the
recommendation from Sage has been
completely clear which is that there is
weak evidence of a small effect in which
a face mask can prevent a source of
infection of going from somebody who is
infected to the people around them now
of course under our current
circumstances
anybody who has symptoms really must
stay at home and that's the thing that
people have done so brilliantly but we
are also concerned that some people are
infected who don't have symptoms or
maybe don't have symptoms yet and that
is the reason that sage has put so much
effort into looking at this question but
the answer is clear that if that the the
evidence is weak and the effect is small
and we've passed that on to our
colleagues in government with which to
make a decision but turning on to your
question about hand-washing and keeping
surfaces clean we have always apps
lutely been really majored on
hand-washing because that's the way you
keep the inside of your house and your
family safe when you come in from
outdoors we would also recommend always
keeping the inside of that the surfaces
in your house clean I that would seem
like common sense to me thanks very much
thanks Ben
the next question is from Dominic waitin
at the Metro Dominic
hilarious Secretary of State John you
said that you knew from the start that
there was a very significant challenge
with care homes so while care homes not
told to ban visitors until March the
16th and while the figures on deaths
outside hospitals not published until
March 31st so the the collection of the
information from the care home sector
has been more difficult than from the
NHS by the distributed nature of the
care system there's 15,000 care homes
which are is part and they're all
they're part of 10,000 different
organizations and so I'm glad we managed
to get the data collection on the point
about visitors that was based on
clinical advice now explain the reason
that the clinical our clinical advisors
gave us and which is that before there
was a widespread incidence of
coronavirus across the community as a
whole the the critical thing is that in
a care home having visitors also has a
positive impact both on on the against
the loneliness of the residents but also
on their longevity and their mental
health and so it is so these are
difficult judgments and there are no
easy recommendations to make and so
absolutely we we follow the the we were
guided by that clinical advice and when
it was necessary to make that change
which is quite a firm change and
then we did so so you know I understand
of course I understand they the focus
now on care homes and the questions from
the media but it's something we've been
working on incredibly hard right from
the start and really you know the one of
the things that has happened in this
crisis is that social care alongside the
NHS have both been seen as these two
absolutely vital parts of our society
and and I think that that's a good thing
that that we we recognize and value them
in that way
James Cavin at the Daily Star hi I just
wanted to ask first of all there's
increasing frustration over what people
see as mixed messaging from the
government around the social distancing
measures you know the one hand we've
seen long queues at DIY stores while on
the other police removing people on for
sitting alone outside and sunbathing in
parks as increasing numbers of people
return to work and roads get busier can
you give glade greater clarity what you
can and can't do outside the house and
second if i can just ask
they've been reports a ventilator
productions it's now being scaled back
just weeks after you called on british
industry to build thousands for the NHS
will we be in a situation soon where we
have a huge supply of these machines all
shapes demand and i just wondered what's
going to happen with that supply and
will the production of new ventilators
continue to be scaled back or do you
still want a more future thanks very
much indeed look on the clarity I can
absolutely give you that that clarity
James which is that people should follow
the social distancing rules and they
should stay at home if at all possible
because that protects the NHS and so far
the protection of the NHS is working and
this brings me to this second point
which is that it is good news that there
are spare ventilated beds available in
the NHS there has been no point when
somebody's needed a ventilator and a
ventilator has not been available a
ventilated bed because it's at it's more
than just the ventilator machine of
course you need the people as well to
use them and that has been one of the
things in this crisis that people said
right at the start that preventing the
NHS from being overwhelmed will be
extremely difficult
some people told me to my face it would
be impossible but that so far has worked
and now with the number of people in the
NHS in hospital with coronavirus falling
we can see that we've managed to keep
the NHS able to treat everybody who
needs it that brings to the question of
ventilators we are still yes producing
those ventilators there are countries
across the world who are now needing
them because their curve is in a
different position and so we're still
working with those companies who I pay
tribute to who've absolutely pulled the
stops out and made sure that we had the
ventilator capacity that we needed when
the number of people on ventilators was
at a peak at its peak which i think was
about three weeks ago and about that so
so I pay tribute to the ventilator
challenge and everybody who participated
in it they've done an amazing job and
they have and so far it's been
successful in ensuring we've always got
those those ventilators that people need
Chris Lloyd from the Nord neck oh no
thanks for having me what is the time
lag of the pandemics progress as the
country went into lockdown at the same
time is it possible that the regions
like here in the Northeast were lockdown
comparatively early and so might not be
hit as hard as was once feared although
I note in your earlier slide there was a
slight uptick in all regions outside of
London of the number of people in
hospital and will have any impact on a
second wave in the regions and how will
the time lag inform policy on lifting
the lockdown do you imagine that some
areas might ease before others or will
we all be in or out of lockdown together
and then hopefully I'm not out staying
my welcome here looking further ahead
northern manufacturing towns bore the
brunt of previous economic downturns so
how will the government ensure its
measures to help the country recover are
regionally applicable in terms of
manufacturing infrastructure even moving
government jobs out of London well Chris
you're very welcome here at the press
conference and I'm going to ask
to answer the the substance of the first
part of your question but the first
thing I'd say is I want to pay tribute
to the people of the Northeast for
staying at home and helping to ensure
that the number of cases in the
Northeast has been relatively low and
you know knowing Newcastle well as I do
I know that the people of the Northeast
are are very gregarious and have and
have done their duty by staying at home
which is what is needed in these
circumstances on the economic question
that you rightly raise and absolutely it
is a top priority to make sure that we
level up this country and that agenda
will be I think even more important once
we're through coronavirus and recovering
from it and Northeast councils have been
allocated more than 600 million pounds
as part of the Business Support Package
and we've identified more than 50,000
business properties which may be able to
receive a grant in the northeast so we
we are putting the the economic support
in place during the crisis but I'm
absolutely sure that after the crisis
the top priority of the government will
be to level up and make sure that all
parts of this country can recover
together because that is going to be a
huge task and if I can ask professor
McLean to answer on the on the shape of
the curve your observation is absolutely
right that London was always high above
the other regions of England and
devolved administrations and interested
me there is a saw a signal in there that
London turned over perhaps a little bit
earlier than other regions and various
of our scientists around the country a
sort of combing through that data and
and other places where we might be able
to see that signal to see if they can
find anything to explain why that should
be so if there is an effect it's quite
small
actually it's it's not a huge great big
difference between the regions you are
right that there is a that yesterday's
numbers were a little bit higher in most
regions than the day before but it's a
tiny effect it's well within the noise
that we see in these data sets I watch
these data incredibly carefully and
whilst I would much rather they went
down
absolutely regularly every day an
increase like that is not something that
worries me the question of whether or
not we should have regional policies I
think is a really interesting one it's
the kind of thing that you can imagine
epidemiologists all over the world not
not just in in this country
puzzling over I think there's always a
trade-off isn't there between making
sure you do things that are incredibly
beautifully tailored to each part of
your population and on the other hand
keeping things simple and actually also
carrying on all being in this together
so I don't have an answer for you for
that at the moment but I can reassure
you that all the time one of the things
we do is we look at the data all
together and we disaggregate it and look
at it in regions thanks very much to
Chris if you've got a follow-up question
egg yeah yeah I mean I did ask about the
time lag as well and whether different
parts of the country might be ease from
the lockdown at different times because
of the time lag yeah well we all be
under the lockdown at the same time
together so that is a question that we
are and we're looking at there's a you
know there was a big benefit I think as
we put all in the lockdown measures of
the whole country moving together we did
think about moving with London and the
Midlands first because they were more
advanced in terms of the number of cases
but we decided that you know we are
really in this together and the shape of
the curve if not the height of the curve
has been very similar across the whole
country
it went up more in London but it's also
come down more but the broad shape has
been similar which is what you'd expect
given that we've all been living through
the same lockdown measures the the other
thing to say is that it isn't just about
the level it's also about the slope of
the
curve and if the r goes above one
anywhere then that would eventually lead
to a to an exponential rise and a second
peak and an overwhelming of the NHS in
that area
unless it's addressed so although the
level of the number of cases is
different in different parts the slope
of the curve has actually been
remarkably similar across the country so
that argues for for doing things as a
hot as a whole country together
I hope that have that make sense and
thanks very much for coming Chris
appreciate it and finally Adam born from
the New Scientist hi you said you're
recruiting 18,000 contact races I went
to to ask how many do you have today
what date were you hit eighteen thousand
and how important are those traces as a
strategy for controlling the virus after
the lockdown and secondly we heard today
that the NHS contact tracing app will be
ready within three weeks what's your
goal for the number of people you want
to download it and how you incentivize
them to do so I knew we I knew we'd get
some tough questions from the New
Scientist the answer to your questions
are as soon as possible and as many as
possible but I know that's not exactly a
numerical answer the we are we're
recruiting the contact tracers I'm sorry
I don't have a the information to hand
us exactly how many we've recruited but
that is underway we hope to have the the
contact tracers who will help when we
find a positive test to work out who
they've been in contact with and make
sure they do the appropriate thing we
hope to have the contact tracers in
place before or at the same time as the
app goes live and you're right on the
the app we're expecting that to be ready
by the middle of May and both of these
things together because they work
together along with the testing and
they'll help us to keep the level of the
level of a new cases down once we've
used social distancing measures to get
those new cases down and
it's the best thing for health and it's
the best thing for the economy and
that's a so that is it's working
progress I appreciate that I haven't
oven saying the middle of May I haven't
given you numerical details I don't have
the data to hand but I'll try to find
that for you
and then on the how many people we the
more people who who download the app and
keep their Bluetooth on the more
effective the app is going to be so
there is no answer other than as many as
possible because if everybody downloads
it it will just be more effective at
spotting who people have been in contact
with through contact tracing and and
helping alongside the human contact
tracing for people to be able to to be
able to keep the are down by catching
those who who they may have transmitted
the disease to it's also of course tied
with the rules around isolation because
if you are what really also matters is
if you have been in substantial contact
with somebody who's tested positive
making sure we get the right rules
around what that person is then required
and asked to do is also a critical part
of this this infrastructure that we're
building I just asked a follow-up
question from what you've just said it's
that you said that the human contact
traces and the app will work in tandem
and if the apps you're saying if the app
is coming in three weeks does that mean
the target for the 18-thousand is in
three weeks i before or at the same time
as the as the app yeah okay good states
thank you very much indeed great to have
the new scientist at the Downing Street
briefing and I hope my answer was
scientifically valid and thank you very
much for joining us and no doubt see you
again soon
[Music]
see the headlines as they happen and
watch BBC News live in the app and get
the full story with BBC decoder UK
forward slash news follow the story for
all the latest with BBC News